---
title: "Everything Wrong with the Modal Ontological Argument"
---
<br>

<div>
<p>
Hello everyone and welcome! This is a “complete failure of the modal ontological argument” in favor of the existence of God, The Inspiring Philosophy generated by our good friend.Let's take a look at it. The modal ontological argument of Alvina Planting is possible the best argument in favor of the existence of God. He uses the laws of modal logic and acts like mathematical evidence. So, let's stop right here.I just adore as an argument has not even begun yet, And this balble already admits that it will be a failure. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Because it doesn’t matter how smart you consider yourself and how amazing you think this argument. Pure logic in itself cannot generate reliable facts about the outside world. This is a tremendous misunderstanding that religious apologists constantly cannot comprehend. As if everything we need to do to find out the deepest secrets of the universe is just to sit in a chair and think very much about everything. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
No, I'm sorry guys, but the world does not work in this way. Logic is not some kind of magical microscope in the deep essence of reality. Instead, what logic can really do is to tell you whether or not the statements that you use to describe reality are correctly connected together. That is why, even without considering the only premise, we can already be completely sure that the modal ontological argument will be a failure. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
This is a small little thing, called the “analytical-synthetic difference”, and you cannot simply casually circumvent it, as if it does not exist. Every time we talk about logical and mathematical evidence, we can only talk about examples of purely “analytical” judgments. This means, no matter what knowledge of the “truth” we declare, it comes only from the very meanings of words. But at the moment when you begin to talk about the things and relationships of “existing” there, in the “real” world, 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Now we are already making “synthetic” judgments, and the currency of this kingdom is pragmatic empirical evidence. What decisions can I now make in the real world with real empirical consequences that will appear when waiting that the divine space agent exists somewhere? Therefore, at the moment when this person claims that he will be able to “prove” the existence of God, using anything more except the “laws of logic”, regardless of any physical evidence, Then he simply admitted that he has no idea what kind of nonsense he carries. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
But, hey, maybe I hurried, so let's give this argument a chance and listen to him, just to make sure. To begin with, this is how a modal ontological argument works.PROPRAME 1: It is possible that God exists. No.Stop.First of all, no, this is not “possible” that God exists. Each time we talk about the being of a type of God, we inevitably talk about a creature endowed with parameters such as omnipotence, omnipotence and omnipotence. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
And, as we know very well, these ideas are initially permeated with paradoxes, and all this only exacerbates when we pushing them at the same time into one agent. Therefore, no, this is not even “possible” for God to exist, because religious apologists can not even define this word in a logically consistent way. The only way from this problem is if we reduce this word within the framework of a more clearly established agent. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
This will at least be a “possible” agent, but most Christian apologists cannot even this. But, it doesn’t matter, let's still say that they did all this, just so that we can understand where this argument is going. Because, obviously, the goal is the conclusion that says: “Therefore, God exists,” right? Therefore, we have an argument with a structure that looks as follows.Prerequisite 1: X perhaps. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
PROPRAME 2: blah blah blah. Conclusion: Therefore, X is really so. Now let's ask ourselves that in principle we could insert between the beginning and the end of this structure, So that the simple possibility of anything logically entails the actual reality of this “something”? Because when we say that there is any judgment of X “possible”, we mean precisely this, That X perhaps, that is, can be true, or maybe the X is not true, we do not know this yet. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
All that we installed is at least the idea of X does not contain contradictions. And it's all.According to classical logic, the only thing that isomatically false is conflicting statements. Everything that does not contain contradictions, therefore, is declared "possible." And under no circumstances, a simple absence of contradictions in the idea does not lead to a sudden mandatory conclusion that such an idea has a valid referent in the real world. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
It simply cannot follow, it will certainly be an illogical conclusion. That is, again, the argument barely began, and we can already see even more signs of his inevitable failure.But let's continue anyway. PROPRAME 2: If it is possible that God exists, then God exists in any possible world. Well, we see a statement that at least not immediately erroneous. However, what we have is a deliberate game with words that should be carefully explained. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Because, every time we say that X exists in any possible world, We do not mean that X literally exists in some kind of trans-spatial world, outside the observed universe. Instead, that we really say, this is that X is a self -compiled way to describe a certain state of affairs. This is a small philosophical game called "semantics of possible worlds." When it became clear to us, the second premise of this argument actually says the following: PROPRAME 2: If the idea of the existence of God is consistent, then we can describe a certain agreed state of things that includes the idea of the existence of God. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
For example, here is a diagram of many possible worlds and impossible worlds. On the right we see many of all impossible worlds, which means descriptions of worlds that cannot be true. These descriptions contain contradictions, and therefore they are all axiomatically false by default. In the same way, we have many possible worlds on the left. And again, these are just a description of what the world could be. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
And since these descriptions are self -consolidated, we say that they are possible true. And then, somewhere among the many of these logical capabilities, we have one element called the “real” world, Which is a certain self -compiled description of the world as it really is. Thus, summarizing the ontological argument up to this point, we have the statement that the existence of God is a self -confined judgment, And therefore, therefore, God is an element of many possible worlds. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Maybe he is an element of the real world, or maybe not.We still do not know this. But perhaps our good Christian friend will be able to show us how this logical step works. PROPRAME 3: If God exists in any possible world, then God exists in all possible worlds. Wow, what?!Where did you get it from? This is how to say: if God owns a home in California, then God owns a house in every state of America.This does not follow at all. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
The correct logic works in the opposite direction.For example, if God owns a house in every state of America, then God owns a home in California. Or we can say: if God owns a house in California, then God owns a house in America. That would be valid deductions, but not this one! Therefore, no.I apologize, Mr. Inspurery philosopher, but you just completely failed on the basic logical theory of sets. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Only because some A are B, this does not lead us to the statement that all A are B. In the same way, the self -conserving of God does not require a magical way to enter his existence into all possible descriptions of reality from us. Here, one does not follow from the other, “Non Sequitur”. Well, now, please.An indisputable fact.And he said that the argument would be a failure, and of course he failed. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Therefore, the remnants of the argument are completely failed, and we can simply stop talking about this shameful attempt in logic.Right? Well, not quite.Just look. So there is a problem.Many come across a typical mistake of misunderstanding the definition of God. Brother, stop, just stop, you will disgrace yourself. For a person who practically advertises his philosophical expertise in the own name of the channel, You should know better than others that it is not important as God is defined. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Only definitions are not converted magically into a physical presence in the real world. Any idiot understands this. The only way to at least get closer to such a goal is to inanimately determine God as an element of many things that exist. But you cannot simply arbitrarily do this, because the existence of God is the very thing that you initially try to prove! If all you are going to do is to directly determine this, then this is no longer an argument, but a statement. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
There are three ways to determine a creature or essence in an ontological argument. The essence can be “impossible”, which means it does not exist in any possible worlds.For example, a square circle. The essence can be “determined”, which means it exists in some possible worlds.For example, a unicorn. A unicorn can exist in some possible worlds, but not in others. And the last, the essence can be “obligatory”, which means that it must exist in all possible worlds. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Do you notice how he admits that all these are pure definitions? He wrote at the top of the screen: ways to determine entities. And since the obligatory entities are defined as existing in all possible worlds, it should be so right? Look, a genius, the only way for something to exist is mandatory, this is if its non-existence somehow leads to a logical contradiction. And the only way for non -existence to lead to contradiction, this is if existence is already an integral part of the definition of the thing itself. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Thus, a non -existent compulsory creature is a logical equivalent of a creature that does not exist, which exists. That is why absolutely nothing in the entire universe can exist "must" Because the idea itself literally means existence by definition. Seriously, what examples can anyone give, in favor of the opposite? Examples of mandatory entities are numbers, absolute truths and definitions of forms. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
For example, take the number "2".No one created it, it just exists.It cannot but exist. Take also the definitions of forms.For example, that the square should have four sides.The square cannot exist with three sides, because it would be logically inconsistent in any possible world. No no no no!Where did this platonic nonsense come from? First of all, no, “absolute truths” do not exist, because truth is not some kind of independent essence-this is a marking. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Judges can be marked as true or false, in accordance with epistemological axioms. And you can even be “absolutely” confident in these markings in the framework of your axiomatic model. But there is no such thing as an independent primary essence of truth. You literally confuse nouns with adjectives.It’s like trying to argue that there is an absolute “big one”. No!Objects can be large or can be small, but there is no such thing as the primary essence of the big. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
In the same way, I can determine the square as an equangible polygon with four sides. But nothing in this definition magically requires the literal existence of squares in the real world. In the best case, what can I say, this is that no object can never be correctly described as a square and as having three sides, Because these descriptions are mutually exclusive by definition. Therefore, no, even your own example does not satisfy the criterion of the necessary existence. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Therefore, when we are talking about God in this argument, we say that if he exists, he must be an obligatory creature. You know?Okay, let's do it in your way.PROPRAME 1: If God exists, then God is an obligatory essence.Literally your words. Prerequisite 2: Mandatory entities are entities that exist in all possible worlds, by definition. Prerelaver 3: The entities that exist in all possible worlds are entities that exist in a real world, according to the axiomatic theory of sets. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
PROPRAME 4: Entities that exist in a real world are entities that exist by definition. Conclusion: Therefore, from the first premise, if God exists, then God by definition of the essence that exists. Congratulations, dumbass, you have just approved your own conclusion through the law of identity. If God exists, then, amazingly, probably God exists. Now, please tell us, specifically why someone should just admit that God exists? Because God is defined as the most great creature. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Well, it means God by definition is the most great creature.And what does it mean? And the most great creature is defined as a creature that has all the qualities that we define, which we define as “exaltation” parameters. Examples are love, wisdom and strength. The greatest creature will also have these qualities to the maximum extent. It also does not have qualities that are bad to have.For example, imperfection or vulnerability.They are defined as “belitizing” parameters. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
I just have to ask, does this person even try to comprehend his own words?Or is he at all thoughtlessly reproducing sounds? First of all, greatness and better are not objectively calculated things. They are called "evaluative judgments."I can talk about an objective volume or objective mass all day, Because these are integral physical parameters that we can objectively measure through actions and consequences. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
But talking about such a thing as objective greatness or objective better is just incoherent nonsense. Secondly, “maximum greatness” is also not a consistent statement, because for any applicant that you can come up with as the greatest, All I need to do is come up with a creature that has all your characteristics, plus the ability to defeat yours in arm wrestling. Therefore, my creature is automatically greater, by definition. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
That is why the maximum thing means nothing logically when the indicators under consideration are unlimited. It’s like trying to calculate the greatest number as possible, you cannot logically do it. But most importantly, you must have a magnifying parameter of obligation. Because being mandatory, this is a parameter that is better to have. So we arrived.See how he tries to imperceptibly drag this manipulation? But real, this is his whole argument in essence.The reason why the greatest creature should be mandatory is because it is what requires the definition of maximum greatness. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Literally because he said so. Thus, again, fine, let's rewrite this argument in essence. PROPRAME 1: It is possible that God exists. Prerequisite 2: God is defined as the most great creature. Prerelaver 3: The maximum greatness is defined as the possession of a set of various exaltation parameters, among which there is a parameter of mandatory existence. Conclusion 1: Therefore, God is defined as a creature that must exist. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
PROPRAME 4: Mandatory existence is defined as existence in all possible worlds. PROPRAME 5: existence in all possible worlds includes existence. Conclusion 2: Therefore, God is defined as a creature that exists. Thus, if you summarize all this in the original premise, then we have the following judgment. PROPRAME 1: It is possible that a creature that exists. And it's all.The conclusion that we are trying to prove is already contained in the very definition of this thing. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
God by definition is a creature that exists, and therefore God exists. And specifically why someone should accept that God is a thing that exists? Well, because this is how the word "God" is defined. This is an exemplary example of a classic logical vicious circle. And these self -proclaimed experts in philosophy, apparently too stupid, or too dishonest to recognize it. Look, guys, you can determine your terms so that they mean everything you want. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
I can define the tribbla as a small spherical rodent that is born pregnant and hates clingones. But only one definition does not mean the sudden existence of a tribbla there, in the real world. What does this really mean is that if I ever face a small spherical rodent with empirical parameters to be born pregnant and hate clingons, Then this thing will be called a tribble. This is what the purpose of the definition in the end serve, and logic is nothing more than a linguistic tool to help us in this process. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
And, hey, if you want to get to record the “existence” in this set of empirical parameters, then for health.All that you said in the end is that this thing is actually a thing that can be empirically demonstrated. And if it turns out that no, I can’t face this thing empirically, then you have just determined the contradiction. That is why God, who can only be concluded through arguments, instead of demonstration through evidence, is functionally equivalent to the complete absence of God. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Finally, one last personal remark.I just want to say that this is again the reason why I have absolutely no respect for Christian apologists. They pretend to be these deep philosophical thinkers, when in reality the best argument they have, this is a bloated circular nonsense. And they do it purposefully.Because they know that they have no empirical evidence for this “God”. That is why they should cover this with a bunch of confusing rhetorical verbal games. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
And this is exactly what is the modal ontological argument in favor of the existence of God - a verbal game. This is a carefully designed stream of impressive technology, dotted with rhetorical ambiguities and deliberate trenches. Initially, he was not even supposed to be rationally justified, but only impressively sounding for incompetent people. This is not a philosophy, it is a dog shit. For example, just look at the first premise: this is “possible” that God exists. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Notice how the wording is carefully selected to look harmless and hide the true structure of the argument. After all, we are all unintentional people, right?Of course, this is “possible” that God exists, right? And at the moment when you naively accepted this first premise, they caught you.The very word "God" was in advance in advance as literally "a thing that exists." And it is so blatantly impudent that at some fundamental level apologists should be aware of what they are doing. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
It is simply impossible to spend so much time and energy, studying the nuances of logical modality and semantics of possible worlds, Not in order to ultimately realize the use of this language. So, in conclusion, if you ever face any Christian apologist that openly protects the ontological argument, then my advice to you: do not even have things to do with them.These people are not interested in honest discussion, And they are only worried about making a popularity of popularity through fooling you in front of the audience. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Therefore, do not give them such joy.When Christians decide to behave as adults and substantiate God with the help of pragmatic empirical rationalism, then we always wait for this.But if all they want to do is play rhetorical verbal games based on known mistakes, unreasonable statements and deliberate turning out of the language, Then they can sit in the corner with all other amateurs, scammers and charlatans. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Thank you for watching. [Translated vk.com/id79920293] 
</p>
</div>
<br>