---
title: "Psychology of Belief, Part 1 Informational Influence"
---
<br>

<div>
<p>
Psychology of beliefs, part 1: Information influence The Holy Bible.From 4 to 6 billion books.Yes, 4-6 billion.This is stunning. And I am glad to realize that the Bible, the true word of God, is still highly valued, and still the most respected book. Christianity is a really very popular religion. Therefore, when it comes to questions of faith, it is completely natural to ask the question: How can as many as 2 billion people be wrong? This is a fair question.He may even force you to agree that this is impossible.At first sight... 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Consider the following experiment: On the left we have three lines of various heights. On the right we have a reference line. Which line is the same in height with the reference? Obviously, the answer is “C”. Therefore, of course, control groups answer this question with 98%accuracy. Now a little change the experimental conditions. Suppose that now several more participants are in the room with you. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Instead of an immediate answer to the question, you must wait until the rest of the subjects give answers. Which line is the same in height with the standard?[C, C, C, C, C, C ... C.] [A,A,A,A,A,A...A] [B,B,B,B,B,B...?] WHAT? The answer is obviously “C”!Did they go crazy? Perhaps something is wrong with your eyes? The test was repeated 18 times. In 12 cases, the group unanimously chose the wrong line. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Of course, no person will allow a bunch of blind Olukhs to distort his perception, right? WRONG. Average conformism: 37% The percentage of subjects who bent under an erroneous opinion in at least half of cases: 30% The percentage of subjects who did not agree with any incorrect decision of the majority: 25% Many experiments have repeatedly reproduced these results. Sooner or later, at least 3/4 of us are publicly subordinate to the erroneous ideas of absolute strangers. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
And some of us even sincerely begin to trust the group perception more than our own. Even when the truth is right in our face. Now suppose that the truth is less obvious. And the bets are much higher. Your task is to indicate the perpetrator when identifying. If you do it, you get $ 20. To complicate the task, they give you to see the guilty only for a short moment. Which person is guilty? Two people next to you say that this is number 3. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Do you agree? Remember that at stake 20 dollars! Of the 13 repetitions, the accomplices agreed on the wrong version 7 times. Without any accomplices, the subjects were mistaken only in 7% of cases. The percentage of conformism in the presence of incorrectly consonant accomplices: 51% And what is all this telling us about? 1) Through the use of a small pressure of the environment, even a group of absolute strangers can convince a person to obey the popular conviction. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
2) False beliefs can be generated by this method with statistical reliability, even when the truth is flagrantly obvious. 3) Unknown + motivation = strong group influence. Now think about how this is applicable to questions of faith. Definitely, the true nature of God is not too obvious. If you have made the right choice, you are rewarded with an eternity in paradise. They chose unsuccessfully, and you can conduct eternity in endless torment. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
In the absence of any alternative information, the natural tendency lies in the simple following the faith of those who surround you. That is why cultural education is the most significant predictive factor of faith in adulthood. Therefore, it is not surprising that 2 billion people can really be mistaken. The main question: "How do we break the vicious circle of faith?" Disagreement Even the emergence of a single disagreement ally is enough to reduce conformism by 80%. 
</p>
</div>
<br>

<div>
<p>
Therefore, insist on your own.Express your doubts.And ask difficult questions. Others can be secretly agreeing with you, and they only need your example to declare this openly. 
</p>
</div>
<br>